[Music]
thank you
we've been told to go out on a limb and
say something surprising
so I'll try and do that but I want to
start with two things that everyone
already knows
and the first one in fact is something
that has been known for most of recorded
history and that is that
the planet Earth or the solar system or
our environment or whatever is
uniquely suited to sustain
our Evolution or creation as it used to
be thought and our present existence and
and most important our future survival
and nowadays this idea has a dramatic
name spaceship earth
and the idea there is that outside the
spaceship the universe is implacably
hostile and inside is all we have all we
depend on and we only get the one chance
if we mess up our spaceship we've got
nowhere else to go now the second thing
that uh everyone already knows is that
contrary to what was believed for most
of human history human beings are not in
fact the Hub of existence and Stephen
Hawking famously said we're just a
chemical scum on the surface of a
typical Planet that's in orbit around a
typical star which is on the outskirts
of a typical Galaxy and and so on
now
the first of those two things that
everyone knows is is kind of saying that
we're at a very untypical place it's
uniquely suited and so on and the second
one is saying that that we're at a
typical place and especially if you
regard these two as deep truths to live
by and to inform your life decisions
then they seem
um a little bit to conflict with each
other
but that doesn't prevent them from both
being completely false
and and they are
so
let me start with with uh with the
second one
typical
well
is this a typical Place well let's look
around you know look in a random
Direction and we see a wall and uh
chemical scum and and
um that's not typical of the universe at
all all you've got to do is go a few
hundred miles in that same direction and
look back and you won't see any walls or
chemical scum at all all you see is as a
blue planet and if you go further than
that
you'll see the sun the solar system and
the stars and so on but that's not still
not typical of the universe because
stars come in galaxies and and most
places in the universe a typical place
in the universe is nowhere near any
Galaxy so so let's go out further till
we're outside the Galaxy
and look back and yeah there's the huge
Galaxy with spiral arms laid out in
front of us and
at this point we've come
a hundred thousand light years from here
but we're still nowhere near
a typical place in the universe to get
to a typical place you've got to go a
thousand times as far as that
into Intergalactic space
and so what does that look like typical
what is a typical place in the universe
look like well at enormous expense Ted
has arranged a high resolution
immersion virtual reality rendering
of Intergalactic space the view from
Intergalactic space so can we have the
lights off please so we can see it
well not quite not quite perfect uh you
see in Intergalactic space is
Intergalactic space is completely dark
pitch dark it's so dark that if you were
to be looking at the nearest star to you
and that star were to explode as a
supernova
and you were to be staring directly at
it at the moment when its light reached
you
you still wouldn't be able to see even a
glimmer
that's how big and how dark the universe
is and that's despite the fact that
a supernova is so bright so brilliant an
event
that it would kill you Stone dead at a
range of several light years
and yet from Intergalactic space it's so
far away you wouldn't even see it
it's also very cold out there less than
three degrees above absolute zero and
it's very empty the vacuum there is one
million times less dense than the
highest vacuum that our best technology
on Earth can currently create
so that's how
different a typical place is from this
place and that is how untypical this
place is so can we have the lights back
on please thank you
now how do we know about an environment
that's so far away and so different and
so alien from anything we're used to
well the Earth our environment in the
form of us
is
creating knowledge well what does that
mean well look out of even further than
than we've just been I mean from here
with the telescope and you'll see things
that look like stars they're called
quasars quasars originally meant
quasi-stellar object which means things
that look a bit like stars and but
they're not stars and we know what they
are
billions of years ago and billions of
light years away the material at the
center of of a galaxy collapsed towards
a supermassive black hole and an intense
magnetic fields directed some of the
energy of that gravitational collapse
and some of the matter back out in the
form of tremendous Jets which
illuminated lobes with the Brilliance of
I think it's a trillion Suns
now
the physics of the human brain could
hardly be more unlike the physics of
such a jet we couldn't survive for an
instant in it it the language breaks
down when trying to describe what it
would be like in one of those Jets it
would be a bit like experiencing a
supernova explosion but at point-blank
range and for millions of years at a
time
and yet that jet
happened in precisely such a way
that billions of years later on the
other side of the universe some bit of
chemical scum could accurately describe
and model and predict and explain above
all
there's your reference
what was happening there in reality
the one physical system the brain
contains an accurate working model of
the other the the Quasar not just a
superficial image of it though it
contains that as well but an explanatory
model embodying the same mathematical
relationships and the same causal
structure now that is knowledge
and if that weren't amazing enough the
faithfulness with which the one
structure resembles the other is
increasing with time that is the growth
of knowledge so the laws of physics have
this special property that physical
objects as unlike each other as they
could possibly be can nevertheless
embody the same mathematical and causal
structure
and to do it more and more so over time
so we are a chemical scum that is
different this chemical scum has
universality its structure contains with
ever increasing Precision the structure
of everything this place and not other
places in the universe is a hub which
contains within itself the structural
and causal essence of the whole of the
rest of physical reality and so far from
being insignificant the fact that the
laws of physics allow this or even
mandate
that this can happen is one of the most
important things about the physical
world
how does the solar system in our
environment in the form of us acquire
this special relationship with the rest
of the universe well one thing that's um
true about Stephen Hawking's remark I
mean it is true but but it's uh the
wrong emphasis one thing that's true
about it is that it it doesn't it
doesn't do it with any special physics
there's no special dispensation no
Miracles involved it does it simply with
three things that we have here in
abundance
one of them is matter because well the
the the the growth of knowledge is a
form of information processing
information processing is computation
computation requires a computer there's
no known way of making a computer
without matter we also need energy to
make the computer and most important to
make the media in in effect on which we
record the knowledge that we discover
and then
thirdly less tangible but just as
essential for the open-ended creation of
knowledge of explanations is
evidence now
now our environment is inundated with
evidence we happen to get around to
testing let's say um Newton's law of
gravity about 300 years ago but the
evidence that we did to do that we used
to do that was was falling down on every
square meter of the Earth for billions
of years before that and will continue
to fall on for billions of years
afterwards
and if the same is true for all the
other Sciences as far as We Know
evidence to discover the most
fundamental truths of all the Sciences
is here just for the taking on our
planet our location is saturated with
evidence and also with matter and energy
out in Intergalactic space those three
prerequisites for the open-ended
creation of knowledge are at their
lowest possible Supply as I said it's
empty it's cold and it's dark out there
or is it
now actually that's just another
parochial misconception because
imagine a cube out there in
Intergalactic space the same size as our
home that the solar system now that cube
is very empty by human standards but
that still means that it contains over a
million tons of matter and a million
tons is enough to make say a
self-contained space station on on which
there's a colony of scientists that that
are devoted to creating an open-ended
stream of knowledge and so on
now it's Way Beyond present technology
to even gather the hydrogen from
Intergalactic space
and and form it into other elements and
so on but
but the thing is in a comprehensible
Universe if something isn't forbidden by
the laws of physics
then what could possibly prevent us from
doing it other than knowing how in other
words it's a matter of knowledge not
resources and the same well if we could
do that we'd automatically have an
energy Supply because this transmutation
would be a fusion reactor and and
evidence well again it's dark out there
to human senses but all you've got to do
is take a telescope even one of present
day design look out and you'll see the
same galaxies as we do from here
and with a more powerful telescope
you'll be able to see stars and planets
in those galaxies you'll be able to do
astrophysics and learn the laws of
physics and locally there you could
build particle accelerators and learn
elementary particle physics and
chemistry and so on probably the hardest
science to do would be biology field
trips because because it would take
several hundred million years to get to
the nearest life-bearing planet and back
but I have to tell you and sorry Richard
but I never did like biology field trips
much and
I think we can just about make do with
one every few hundred million years
so
in fact Intergalactic space
does contain all the prerequisites for
the open-ended creation of knowledge
any such Cube anywhere in the universe
could become the same kind of Hub that
we are
if the knowledge of how to do so were
present there
so we're not in a uniquely hospitable
place if Intergalactic space is capable
of creating an open-ended stream of
explanations then so is almost every
other environment so is the Earth so is
a polluted Earth and the limiting factor
there and here is not resources because
they're plentiful but knowledge which is
scarce
now this Cosmic
knowledge-based View
May and I think ought to make us feel
very special
but it should also make us feel
vulnerable because it means that without
the specific knowledge that's needed to
survive the ongoing challenges of the
universe we won't survive them all it
takes is for a supernova to go off a few
light years away and we'll all be dead
Martin Reese has recently written a book
about our vulnerability to ask all all
sorts of things from astrophysics to
scientific experiments gone wrong and
most importantly to terrorism with
weapons of mass destruction and he
thinks that Civilization has only a 50
chance of surviving this Century I think
he's going to talk about that later in
the conference now I don't think that
probability is the right category to
discuss this issue in but I do agree
with him about this we can survive and
we can fail to survive
but it depends not on chance but on
whether we create the relevant knowledge
in time uh the danger is not at all
unprecedented species go extinct all the
time civilizations end the overwhelming
majority of all species and all
civilizations that have ever existed are
now history and if we want to be the
exception to that then logically our
only hope is to make use of the one
feature that distinguishes our species
and our civilization from all the others
namely our special relationship with the
laws of physics our ability to create
new explanations new knowledge to be a
hub of existence
so let me now apply this to to a current
controversy uh not not because I want to
Advocate any particular solution but
just to illustrate the kind of thing I
mean the controversy is global warming
now I'm a physicist but I'm not the
right kind of physicist in in in regard
to global warming I'm just a Layman and
the rational thing for a Layman to do is
to take seriously the prevailing
scientific theory and according to that
theory it's already too late to avoid a
disaster because if it's true that our
best option at the moment is to prevent
CO2 emissions with something like the
Kyoto Protocol with its constraints on
economic activity and its enormous cost
of hundreds of billions of dollars or
whatever it is then that is already a
disaster by any reasonable measure and
the actions that advocated are not even
purported to solve the problem merely to
postpone it by a little
so it's already too late to avoid it and
it probably has been too late to avoid
it ever since before anyone realized the
danger it was probably already too late
in the 1970s when the best available
scientific theory was bring us that
industrial emissions were about to
precipitate a new Ice Age in which
billions would die
now the lesson of that seems clear to me
and I don't know why it isn't informing
public debate it is that we can't always
know when we know of an impending
disaster and how to solve it at a cost
less than the cost of the disaster
itself then there's not going to be much
argument really
but no precautions and no precautionary
principle
can avoid problems that we do not yet
foresee
hence we need a stance of problem fixing
not just problem avoidance
and it's true that an ounce of
prevention equals a pound of cure but
that's only if we know what to prevent
if you've been punched on the nose then
the science of medicine does not consist
of teaching you how to avoid punches
if Medical Science stopped seeking cures
and concentrated on prevention only then
it would achieve very little of either
so the world is buzzing at the moment
with plans to force reductions in gas
emissions at all costs it ought to be
buzzing with plans to reduce the
temperature and with plans to live at
the higher temperature and not at all
costs but efficiently and cheaply and
some such plans exist things like swarms
of mirrors in space to deflect the
sunlight away and encouraging aquatic
organisms to eat more carbon dioxide at
the moment these things are Fringe
research they're not Central to the
human effort to face this problem or
problems in general
and with problems that we are not aware
of yet the ability to put right not the
sheer good luck of avoiding indefinitely
is our only hope not just of solving
problems but of survival
so
take two stone tablets
and carve on them
on one of them carve problems are
soluble and on the other one carve
problems are inevitable
thank you
[Music]
ideas weren't cherished
what if they carried no importance
[Music]
there is a place where artistic vision
is protected where inspired design ideas
live on to become ultimate driving
machines
[Music]